## Machine Learning
- The term Machine Learning was coined in 1959 by Arthur Samuel, an IBM employee and pioneer in the field of Computer Gaming and Artificial Intelligence. The synonym self-teaching computers was also used in this time period.
- Although the earliest Machine Learning model was introduced in the 1950s when Arthur Samuel invented a program that calculated the winning chance in checkers for each side, the history of Machine Learning roots back to decades of human desire and effort to study human cognitive processes.
- In 1949, Donald Hebb, a Canadian psychologist, published a book title The Organization of Behavior where he introduced the Hebbian Theory, discussing the neural structure or synapses between the nerve cells. Hebb’s model of neurons interacting with one another sets the groundwork for how AI and ML algorithms work under nodes, or artificial neurons used by computers to communicate data.
- Other researchers who have studied on human cognitive systems contributed to the modern Machine Learning technologies as well including logician Walter Pitts and Warren McCulloch, who proposed the early mathematical models of Neural Networks to come up with algorithms that mirror human thought process.
- By the early 1960s an experimental “learning machine” with punched tape memory, called Cybertron, had been developed by Raytheon Company to analyze sonar signals, electrocardiograms, and speech patterns using rudimentary Reinforcement Learning. It was repetitively “trained” by a human operator to recognize patterns and equipped with a “goof” button to cause it to re-evaluate incorrect decisions.
- A representative book on research into Machine Learning during the 1960s was Nilsson’s book on Learning Machines, dealing mostly with Machine Learning for patter classification.
- Interest related to Pattern Recognition continued into the 1970s, as described by Duda and Hart in 1973.
- In 1981, a report was given on using teaching strategies so that a neural network learns to recognize 40 characters (26 letters, 10 digits, and 4 special symbols) from a computer terminal.
- Tom Mitchell provided a widely quoted, more formal definition of the algorithms studied in the Machine Learning field: “A computer program is said to learn from experience E with respect to some class of tasks T and performance measure P if its performance at tasks in T, as measured by P, improves with experience E. This definition of the tasks in which Machine Learning is concerned offeres a fundamentally operational definition rather than defining the field in cognitive terms. This follows Alan Turing’s proposal in his paper Computing Machinery and Intelligence, in which the question Can Machines think? was replaced with the question Can machines do what we (as thinking entities) can do?

## Artificial Intelligence
- As a scientific endeavor, Machine Learning grew out of the quest for Artificial Intelligence. In the early days of AI as an academic discipline, some researchers were interested in having machines learn from data. They attempted to approach the problem with various symbolic methods, as well as what were then termed Neural Networks, these were mostly Perceptron and other models that were later found to be reinventions of the Generalized Linear Models of Statistics. Probabilistic Reasoning was also employed, especially in automated medical diagnosis.
- However, an increasing emphasis on the logical, knowledge-based approached caused a rift between AI and ML. Probabilistic systems were plagued with theoretical and practical problems of data acquisition and representation.
- By the 1980, expert systems had come to dominate AI, and Statistics was out of favor. Work on symbolic/knowledge-based learning did continue within AI, leading to Inductive Logic Programming, but the more statistical line of research was now outside the field of AI proper, in Pattern Recognition and Information Retrieval.
- Around this time, Neural Networks research has been abandoned by AI and Computer Science. This line was continued outside the AI/CS field as Connectionism, by researchers from other disciplines including Hopfield, Rumelhart and Hinton. Their main success came in the mid-1980s with the reinvention of Back Propagation
- Machine Learning, reorganized and recognized as its own field, started to flourish in the 1990s. The field changed its goal from achieving General Artificial Intelligence to tackling solvable problems of a practical nature. It shifted from symbolic approaches it had inherited from AI, and toward methods and models borrowed from Statistics , Fuzzy Logic, and Probability Theory
## Data Mining
- Machine Learning and Data Mining often employ the same methods and overlap significantly, but while Machine Learning focuses on prediction based on known properties from the training data, Data Mining focuses on the discovery of unknown properties in the data. This is the analysis step of Knowledge Discovery in Databases.
- Data Mining uses many Machine Learning methods, but with different goals. On the other hand, Machine Learning also employs Data Mining methods like Unsupervised Learning as a preprocessing step to improve learner accuracy.
- In Machine Learning, performance is usually evaluated with respect to the ability to reproduce known knowledge, while in knowledge discovery and Data Mining, the key task is the discovery of previously unknown knowledge.
## Optimization
- Machine Learning also has intimate ties to Optimization. Many learning problems are formulated as minimization of some Loss Function on a training set of examples. Loss functions express the discrepancy between predictions of the model being trained and the actual problem instances. For example, in classification, one wants to assign a label to instances, and models are trained to correctly predict the pre-assigned labels of a set of examples.
## Generalization
- The difference between Optimization and Machine Learning arises from the goal of Generalization. While Optimization algorithms can minimize the loss on a training set, Machine Learning is concerned with minimizing the loss on unseen samples. Characterizing the Generalization of various learning algorithms is an active topic of current research, especially Deep Learning algorithms.
## Statistics
- Machine Learning and Statistics are closely related fields in terms of methods, but distinct in their principal goal - Statistics draws population inferences from a sample, while Machine Learning finds generizable predictive patterns. According to Michael I. Jordan, the ideas of Machine Learning, from methodological principles to theoretical tools, have had a pre-history in Statistics. He also suggested the term Data Science as a placeholder to call the overall field.
- Conventional statistical analyses require the a priori selection of a model most suitable for the study data set. In addition, only significant or theoretically relevant variables based on previous experience are included for analysis. In contrast, Machine Learning is not built on a pre-structured model, rather, the data shape the model by detecting underlying patterns. The more variables (input) used to train the model, the more accurate the ultimate model will be.
- Leo Breiman distinguished two statistical modeling paradigms: data model and algorithmic model, wherein “algorithmic model” means more or less the Machine Learning algorithms like Random Forest. Some statisticians have adopted methods from Machine Learning, leading to a combined field that they call Statistical Learning
## Physics
- Analytical and computational techniques derived from deep-rooted Physics of disordered systems can be extended to large-scale problems, including Machine Learning, e.g. to analyze the weight space of deep Neural Networks. Statistical Physics is thus finding Physics Applications in the area of medical diagnostics.